(lively music)
(keyboard clacking)
All right, so in this video,
we're gonna take a look
at some of the classes and interfaces in the JDK
that are related to queues.
But before we do that, I just wanted to say
that the time complexity for a queue that's backed
by an array will of course either be constant or linear.
It'll be constant O of one
if we don't have to resize the array
and linear if we do.
Now, I'm not going to go through the implementation
of a queue with a linked list,
a linked list, a doubly linked list
is perfect of queues.
I mean, you add items to the tail
of the list and you remove items from the head of the list.
It's perfect and all of the operations,
the add, remove, and peak operations
would be performed in constant time.
To implement the queue,
we'd do exactly what we did when we implemented
a stack using a linked list.
We'd wrap the LinkedLink class
with a some other class that we would call a queue let's say
and we would just expose the add, remove
and peak methods and so, I'm not gonna go through that again
because it's simple to do
and if you need to review what we did with the stack,
you can go ahead and watch the video
about backing a stack with a linked list
and the only difference with a queue
would be that instead of exposing the push, pop
and peak methods, you would expose
the add, remove and peak methods.
Okay, so with that out of the way,
let's take a look at some of the classes in the JDK.
The JDK has a queue interface
that we can use and as you can see,
there are quite a number of classes that implement this.
If we take a look at the methods,
we'll see there's not that many.
There's the add method, the peak method
and the remove method.
There's also pull, it says it retrieves and removes
the head of this queue
or returns null if the queue is empty,
so with remove, I believe if the queue is empty,
let's check this, we'll get the no such element exception.
So, the difference between pull and remove
is in the remove case,
if the queue is empty, you get an exception
and in the pull case, if it's empty,
you're just gonna get a null.
There's also offer and you'll see here
it inserts the specified element
if it's possible to do so
without violating capacity restrictions.
So this returns a Boolean,
you'll get a true back if it was able
to insert the element and false otherwise,
so queue isn't a very complex interface.
It's only been in the JDK since 1.5,
so it's rather new
and as we just saw,
the add, remove and element,
they're using element for peak
that they throw an exception if you can't complete it
and in this interface, offer, pull and peak
will return a special value.
So, when we implemented peak,
we were throwing an exception,
so we kind of implemented the methods
that are in this column,
didn't use the same names
'cause we weren't implementing queue
and the methods in this column
don't throw exceptions, if they can't do something,
they'll let you know by returning a specific value.
So, here's a ArrayBlockingQueue.
And if we go to that one, we'll see
that it's a bounded blocking queue backed by an array
and of course the queue orders elements FIFO,
first in, first out.
Now this is a bounded blocking queue,
so it doesn't resize the array.
It says once created, the capacity cannot be changed.
Attempts to put an element into a full queue
will result in the operation blocking.
If a thread tries to add an element into this queue,
it will block until some other thread
has come along and taken an element out of the queue.
And the same goes for remove.
If you call remove and the queue is empty,
then you'll gonna block until something's added to the queue
and if we take a look at the package,
we'll see that this is in the java.util.concurrent package.
So, it's meant to be used
when more than one thread is gonna be accessing the queue.
So, often this type of queue
is used in producer-consumer scenarios.
So, let's say, for example,
messages are being passed over a network
from a producer to a consumer,
the producer or the sender adds messages to the queue,
and the consumer or receiver will remove messages
from the queue.
If the producer, the sender tries to add a message
to the queue and the queue was full, it's gonna block
until the receiver has removed a message from the queue
and of course if the receiver goes to take a message
off the queue and there's nothing there,
it's gonna block until the sender has sent another message.
So, this producer-consumer scenario
is a perfect scenario for FIFO behaviour
when you want the messages to be read
in the order that they're sent, right?
You can use a queue,
you add messages to the end of the queue
and at the other end,
the receiver is gonna be taking messages off the front
of the queue and so, the receive is going to be processing
the messages in the order that they were sent
and so, this implements the queue interface.
You'll see there's also a BlockingQueue interface
and it implements that as well.
Now if we go back to the queue interface,
we'll see there's another class called ConcurrentLinkedQueue
and this is an unbounded thread safe queue
based on linked nodes,
so this is based on a linked list.
It's also in the java.util.concurrent package
because it's meant to be used by multiple threads
but you'll notice that this one is using
an efficient non-blocking algorithm
and so, it doesn't block
and one other thing to note
is beware that unlike in most collections,
the size method is not a constant time operation.
Now normally to get the size,
the number of steps doesn't depend on the number of items
in the list because you're usually just keeping a counter
but because this implementation of a queue
can be accessed by multiple threads,
determining the number of elements requires
a traversal of the elements
and so, that's not going to be a constant time operation.
So, let's go back to the queue interface
and as I said, there's a number of queues here
and just like with the list,
if you wanna implement your own queue,
you might wanna start with the AbstractQueue class
because that will have implemented the methods
for queue and you can just override the ones
that you wanna customise.
We'll see that the plain old LinkedList implements queue
and as I said,
we can wrap this class just as we did for stacks
and only expose the methods that are related to queues
and before we leave this topic,
I'll leave you to explore the other classes on your own,
I wanna look at the Deque interface.
So, we saw this interface
when we were looking at stacks
and a Deque supports insertion and removal at both ends
and Deque is short for double-ended queue
and is usually pronounced deque
and so, I've actually been pronouncing it wrong.
It's one of those things
that I don't say very often.
I probably have it in my notes somewhere
to pronounce it deque, so there you go.
It's pronounced deque
and there's a few tables down here
that summarise how you work at the head,
how you work at the tail
and then a comparison of the queue
and the deque methods.
Now I know to say that as deque.
As we saw when we looked at stacks,
Java has an ArrayDeque class right here
and this is a resizable array implementation,
so there's no capacity restrictions.
This class was only added in Java 1.6,
so it's pretty new
and because it implements the deque interface,
it has methods for addFirst and addLast
because with the deque, we're allowed to add
at the beginning and the end of a queue
and of course LinkedList also implements
this deque interface.
We saw that when we were looking at linked lists.
So, if you have a situation where you want a queue
that you can add and remove items from both ends,
then using one of the classes
that implements the deque interface would be good for you.
Queues are used way more often than double-ended queues.
So, that's why we went into more detail about queues
and that's pretty much all I'm gonna say
about deques or double-ended queues.
So, I'll see you in the next video.